Chapter XII Perfect Wisdom the Mother of the Buddhas

If a mother with many sons had fallen ill,They all, sad in mind, would busy themselves about
her:Just so also the Buddhas in the world-systems in the ten directionsBring to mind this
perfection of wisdom as their mother.

The Saviours of the world who were in the past, and also those that are [just now] in the ten
directions,Have issued from her, and so will the future ones be.She is the one who shows
the world [for what it is], she is the genetrix, the mother of the Jinas,And she reveals
the thoughts and actions of other beings.

How the Tathagata Knows the WorldThe Suchness of the world, the Suchness of the Arhats,The Suchness
of Pratyekabuddhas, and the Suchness of the Jinas,As just one single Suchness free
from existence, unaltering,Has the perfection of wisdom been understood by the Tathagata.

Whether the wise abide in the world, or whether they have gone to final Nirvana,Firmly established
remains this fixed sequence of Dharmahood:‘Dharmas are empty.’ It is that Suchness
(tathata) which the Bodhisattvas understand.Therefore then have the Buddhas been given the
name of ‘Tathagatas.’

This is the sphere of the Guides, with their own powers,Who reside in the delightful forests
of the perfection of wisdom.Although they fetch suffering beings out of the three places
of woe,Yet they never have anywhere the notion of a being.

Similes about the BuddhaWhen a lion, residing in his mountain cave,Roars fearlessly, the lesser
beasts are made to tremble:Likewise, when the Lion of Men, depending on the perfection
of wisdom,Roars fearlessly, the many heretics are made to tremble.

Just as the rays of the sun, supported by the ether,Dry up this earth, and do reveal its form:Just
so the king of the Dharma, supported by the perfection of wisdom,Dries up the river
of craving and reveals the dharma.

The Tathagata’s Vision of DharmaWherein there is no vision of form, no vision of feelings,No
vision of perception, no vision of will,No vision of consciousness, thought or mind,This
has been expounded as the vision of Dharma by the Tathagata.

A vision in space is a being, so they declare.A vision like that of space, so should you consider
that object!Thus has the vision of Dharma been expounded by the Tathagata.But it is
not possible to report on that vision by definite statements [that differ from it].

