Chapter XX The Three Doors to Deliverance, and the Buddha-dharmas

Furthermore, the Bodhisattva who courses in the wisdom of the JinasCognizes these skandhas as
unproduced, as empty from the beginning.Even during the time that unconcentrated he views
in compassion the world of beings,He does not become destitute of the Buddha-dharmas.

The Simile of the HeroA skilful man, endowed with all qualities,Powerful, unassailable, well-qualified,
instructed in many arts,Perfect in archery, devoted to many crafts,Perfect in
knowing the various forms of magical illusion, keen on the welfare of the world.

He takes his mother and father, together with his sons and daughtersAnd enters a wilderness,
full of many hostile forces.He conjures up many men, heroic champions,Gets away safely, and
again goes back to his home;

Just so at that time when a wise BodhisattvaExtends the great friendliness to all in the world
of beings,Having passed beyond the four Maras, and the two levels,He permanently abides
in the best of concentrations, but he does not experience enlightenment.

The Simile of the CosmosSupported by space is air, and [by that] the mass of water;By that again
is supported this great earth and the [living] world.If the foundation of the enjoyment
of the deeds of beingsIs thus established in space, how can one think of that object?

Just so the Bodhisattva, who is established in emptinessManifests manifold and various works
to beings in the world,And his vows and cognitions are a force which sustains beings.But
he does not experience the Blessed Rest; for emptiness is not a place to stand on.

At the time when the wise and learned BodhisattvaCourses in this most excellent quietude of
the concentration on emptiness,During that time no sign should be exalted,Nor should he stand
in the signless; for he is one who courses calm and quiet.

The Simile of the Flying BirdA flying bird has no footing in the intermediate space.It does
not stand on it, nor does it fall to the ground.So the Bodhisattva who courses in the doors
to freedomNeither experiences the Blessed Rest, nor does he course in the sign.

The Simile of the ArcherAs a man trained in archery shoots an arrow upwards,And then again other
arrows in [quick] succession,Without giving [a chance] to the first one to fall to the
groundUntil he wishes the arrow to fall to the ground.

Just so someone who courses in wisdom, the best of perfections,And who accomplishes wisdom,
skill in means, the powers and the ability to work wonders:As long as these wholesome roots
remain unfulfilledSo long he does not obtain that most excellent emptiness.

The Simile of the Twin MiracleA monk endowed with the most excellent ability to work wondersStanding
in the sky performs the twin miracle:He exhibits the coming and going, the lying
down and the sitting;But he cannot be made to desist, nor does he feel exhausted however long
he may be in it.

Just so the wise Bodhisattva, standing in emptiness,Perfect in cognition and the ability to
work wonders, wandering without a home,Manifests an endless variety of works to the world,But
he cannot be worn down, nor does he feel exhausted for kotis of aeons.

The Simile of the ParachutesIt is as with some men who have stood on a high cliff;If they held
a parachute in each hand and would jump off into space,Their bodies, once they had left
the high cliffs,Would go on falling until they had reached the ground.

Just so the wise Bodhisattva, having stood in compassion,Having taken-hold of the two parachutes
of skill in means and of wisdom,Considers dharmas as empty, signless and wishless;Though
he does not experience the Blessed Rest, he nevertheless sees the dharmas.

The Simile of the Merchant and the Jewel IslandSomeone, desirous of jewels, has travelled to
the treasure island,And, having obtained the jewels, he would again return home.Although
in those circumstances the merchant lives quite happily,Yet he bears in mind the hosts of
his suffering kinsmen:

Just so the Bodhisattva who has travelled to the treasure isle of Emptiness,And has obtained
the trances, faculties and powers;Although he could experience the Blessed Rest, wholly delighting
in it,He would bear in mind all suffering beings.

The Simile of the Merchant and His JourneyAs a merchant, interested in business, goes into the
cities,Market towns and villages, which he comes across on his way, so as to get acquainted
with them;But he neither abides therein, nor in the treasure island;But he, the discerning,
becomes skilful in the path [which leads] to his home.

Just so the wise Bodhisattvas who become skilful everywhereIn the cognition and emancipation
of the Disciples and Pratyekabuddhas,They abide not therein, nor in the Buddha-cognition,Nor
in what is conditioned.Wise as to the path becomes the one who knows the method.

The Bodhisattva UndefinableAt the time when he has communed with the world in friendliness,And
courses in the concentrations on emptiness, the signless and the wishless:It is impossible
that he either would [have an inclination to] reach the Blessed Rest,Or that he could
be defined by the conditioned.

As a magically created man, or one who has made his body invisible,Cannot be defined by words:Just
so the Bodhisattva who courses in the doors to freedomCan also not be defined by words.

The Doors to Deliverance and the Irreversible StageIf on being questioned about the practice
and the facultiesA Bodhisattva does not effect the revelation of deep dharmasWhich are empty
and signless, if he fails to indicate the dharmas peculiar toThe irreversible stage, he
should not be known as one who has been predicted.

Tokens of IrreversibilityNot the level of an Arhat nor the Pratyekabuddha-level,Nor what belongs
to the triple world does he long for in his dreams;But he sees the Buddhas, and himself
as one who preaches Dharma to the world:Predicted as ‘irreversible’ should he then be known.

Having seen in his dreams the beings who are in the three places of woe,He makes the vow, ‘May
I that very instant abolish the places of woe!’If, through the power of his declaration
of the Truth, he appeases even a mass of fire:Predicted as ‘irreversible’ should he then
be known.

Those possessed by ghosts, with various diseases, in the world of mortals,Through the power
of his declaration of the Truth he appeases them, he who is benevolent and compassionate.Nor
does there arise to him any self-consciousness or pride:Predicted as ‘irreversible’ should
he then be known.

