Chapter XXII The Good Friends and the Perfections

Therefore then the learned who has slain pride,Who seeks with weighty resolution for the best
enlightenment,Should, as one attends upon a physician to be cured of a multitude of ailments,Attend
upon the good friend, undaunted.

The Buddhas, the Bodhisattvas who have set out for the best enlightenment,And [those who have]
these perfections have been enumerated as ‘the good friends.’It is they who instruct them
[i.e. the Bodhisattvas] in these progressive stages,For a double reason they [quickly]
understand the Buddha-enlightenment.

The past and future Jinas, and those who stand [just now] in all the ten directions,They all
[have] this perfection for their path, and no other.As a splendid illumination, as a torch,
as a light, as the TeacherHave these perfections been described to those who have set out
for the best enlightenment.

As he cognizes the perfection of wisdom through the mark of emptiness,So by the same mark he
cognizes all these dharmas;When he wisely knows dharmas as empty, as without marks,In coursing
thus he courses in the wisdom of the Sugatas.

Defilement and PurificationIn want of food, indulging in imagination, beingsAlways wander about
in birth-and-death, their minds attached.Both I and Mine as dharmas are unreal and empty.By
his own self has the fool become entangled in space.

As someone who suspects that he has been poisonedMay well be struck down, although no poison
has got into his stomach;Just so the fool who has admitted into himself [the notions of]
I and MineIs forced by that quite unreal notion of an I to undergo birth and death again and
again.

Where one takes notice, there is defilement, so it has been revealed;The non-apprehension of
I and Mine has been called purification.But there is herein no one who is defiled or who
is cleansed.Then the Bodhisattva has understood the perfection of wisdom.

The Supreme Merit of Perfect WisdomIf as many beings as there are here in the entire JambudvipaWould
all, having aspired for the foremost enlightenment,And having given gifts for many
thousands of kotis of yearsDedicate it all to the enlightenment linked to the weal of the
world;

But if someone else, practised in wisdom, the foremost perfection,Would for even one single
day comply with it:An infinitesimal merit would here that heap of giving bring.Therefore the
undaunted should always plunge into wisdom.

Compassion and Perfect WisdomWhen the Yogin courses in wisdom, the best of perfections,He engenders
the great compassion, but no notion of a being.Then the wise becomes worthy of the
offerings of the whole world,He never fruitlessly consumes the alms of the realm.

The Bodhisattva who wishes to set free the gods and men,Bound for so long, and the beings in
the three places of woe,And to manifest to the world of beings the broad path to the other
shore,Should be devoted to the perfection of wisdom by day and by night.

The Simile of the Pearl of Great PriceA man who had gained at some time a very fine jewelWhich
he had not got before, would be contented.If, as soon as he had gained it, he would lose
it again through carelessness,He would be sorry and constantly hankering after the jewel.

Just so the Yogin who has set out for the best enlightenmentShould not get parted from the perfection
of wisdom, which is comparable to a jewel,Seizing the jewel which he has gained,
with growing energyHe moves forward, and swiftly he comes to the [state of] Bliss.

