Chapter V The Counterfeit and the True Perfection of Wisdom

When a Bodhisattva [falsely] reveals form, perception, feeling, will,Or thought as impermanent
[claiming that they are destroyed], -In the counterfeit [perfection of wisdom] he courses,
considering not wisely;Because the learned never effect the destruction of a dharma.

Wherein of form, of feeling, or perception,Or consciousness, or will there is no apprehension:By
the method of emptiness and non-production [he] cognizes all dharmas.This is the practice
of wisdom, the foremost perfection.

Perfect Wisdom Greater Than Any Other Spiritual GiftIf someone would discipline in Arhatship
as many beingsAs there are in fields equal to the sands of the river Ganges:And if someone
else, having copied this perfection of wisdom,Would give the book to another being, - his
would be the more distinguished merit.

For what reason? The supreme Teachers, trained in this,Make all dharmas intelligible in this
emptiness.When they have learned that the Disciples speedily experience their own kind of
emancipation,Others experience Pratyekabuddha-enlightenment, others again the Buddha-enlightenment.

Importance of the Thought of EnlightenmentWhere there is no sprout, there can in the world be
no tree.How can therein be the production of branches, leaves, fruits or flowers?Without
the aspiration for enlightenment there is no possibility of a Jina in the world.How then
could Sakra,Brahma, fruit and disciples manifest themselves?

When the orb of the sun sends forth a multitude of light,Then beings exert themselves in doing
their work:So, when the thought of enlightenment has come into being for the sake of knowing
the world,Through its cognition all the dharmas of quality are assembled.

If there were no Chief of the Serpents in his Anavatapta [Lake],How could there be here in Jambudvipa
a flowing along of the rivers?And if there were no rivers, fruits and flowers could
not possibly be,And there would also be no manifold jewels in the oceans.

So, if there were no thought of enlightenment, how could there beThe flowing along of the cognition
of the Tathagata in all these worlds?And if there is no cognition, there can be no
growth of the virtues,No enlightenment, nor the oceanlike dharmas of the Buddha.

The Sun and the FireflyIf all the light-emitting animals everywhere in this worldWould, for
the purpose of illumination, shed light:One single ray, issued from the orb of the sun, outshines
them all,And infinitesimal would be all the luster of the hosts of light-emitting
animals.

